---
layout: post
title: Creating a Scoop bucket and package for a .JAR File
---

**So you have a .jar file, and want to distribute it on Windows.**

I couldn't find an all in one place with info on how to do this easily, so that is what I am aiming to do here. 

## Scoop

[Scoop](https://scoop.sh) is a relatively new package manager for Windows, and is a great way to install software and keep it up to date. If you do not already have Scoop installed, you can install it my opening a new Powershell prompt, and running this command:

```powershell
iwr -useb get.scoop.sh | iex
```

If you get an error, run this command first and then run the previous one:

```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -scope CurrentUser
```

For more information on Scoop, you can read the [documentation](scoop).



## Creating a Scoop Bucket

Throughout this post we will use an example program, cool-app, with the file cool-app.jar. This tutorial also assumes you know how to use Git and GitHub, and that you have generated a "fat jar" using Maven Shade or Gradle ShadowJar.

Creating a scoop bucket is a simple process, and can be done pretty painlessly.

First, you will want to create a **public** GitHub repo specifically for your bucket. This should be **separate** from any repo for your project. You can call it anything, we'll call ours scoop-coolapp. A README isn't necessary, nor is a .gitignore, and any license will suffice if you decide to use one. 

Once the repo is up, we can move on to creating the App Manifest. Scoop will only recognize your repo as a bucket once you add an app manifest.



## Creating the App Manifest

The App Manifest is the file that tells Scoop how to install your program. You can create and edit one right in your GitHub repo by going to your repo's homepage, clicking the "Add file" button, clicking "Create new file", and naming the file \<appname\>.json, \<appname\> being the name of your app. The name of this file will be the command you use to install it with Scoop, so if, for example, you name your manifest "cool-app.json", you would install the package by running "scoop install cool-app". 

Once you have your manifest created, you can base yours on my example below.

```json
{   
    "version": "1.2.0",
    "description": "A tool to help work with inline math in Markdown files, written in Java.",
    "homepage": "https://github.com/sohalsdr/mdMathTool",
    "license": "MIT",
    "url": "https://github.com/sohalsdr/mdMathTool/releases/download/1.2.0/mdMathTool_1.2.0.jar",
    "bin": [
        ["java.exe", "mdmathtool", "-jar $dir\\mdMathTool_1.2.0.jar"]
    ],
    "suggest": {
        "JRE8": ["java/oraclejre8","java/openjdk8"]
    },
    "hash": "6423e6274c6cf6aded7e9cdd0d0df9a2365304bf9896482f0a9816436bac2683"
}
```

**What does this all mean?**

| Field       | What it means                                                |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| version     | What version of your app this manifest is for                |
| description | A small blurb describing your app                            |
| homepage    | The application's website (optional but recommended)         |
| license     | What license your app is under                               |
| url         | The download link to your .jar file                          |
| bin         | What to put in the bin directory so your app can be run from anywhere |
| suggest     | Suggested dependencies for your app                          |
| hash        | The SHA256 hash of your .jar                                 |

### bin

```json
[["java.exe", "mdmathtool", -jar $dir\\mdMathTool_1.2.0.jar"]]
```

When we put this into our *bin* field, what we are doing is making an alias to run our .jar. 

In this case what we are telling the computer to do is:

When `mdmathtool` is run, run `java.exe` with the arguments `-jar $dir\\mdMathTool_1.2.0.jar` 

This makes it so that a user can type the name of your command in, and it will run your jarfile.

### suggest

```json
{"JRE8": ["java/oraclejre8", "java/openjdk8"]}
```

This basically suggests to the user that they should install the JRE necessary to run your application. The reason we are using a suggest here rather than a depends is because you can run a java 8 program with newer JRE, so a dependency would be complicated to implement. Change the 8s to whichever java version your program was compiled in.

### hash

This is the SHA256 hash of your jarfile. This is important to make sure the file hasnt been tampered with my any middlemen before reaching the user.

To generate an SHA256 hash, open Command Prompt or Powershell, and `cd` to your jarfile's directory. Then run the command:

```powershell
certUtil -hashfile <jarfile> SHA256
```

This should spit out a checksum for your file, which you can then put in your manifest. This will need to be regenerated every time you make an update for your application.



## Installing your package

Once you have your manifest ready, you can add your scoop bucket using:

```powershell
scoop bucket add <bucket-name> <repo-url>
```

Example:

```
scoop bucket add scoop-coolapp https://github.com/example/scoop-coolapp
```

Then, once your bucket has been added, you can simply do:

```powershell
scoop install <appname>
```

And with any luck, your java app should now be installed through Scoop! 🎉 